this ucsd-tv program is a presentation
of university of california television
for educational and non-commercial use
only
this is a podcast of Scripps Institution
of Oceanography at UC San Diego to learn
more about how you can support scripps
visit us online at scripps UCSD edu in
February Scripps researchers tim barnett
and david pierce dropped a bombshell
when they released an analysis showing
that Lake Mead a key water source for
millions of people in the southwest
could run dry within 15 years without
changes in its use the news to public
attention to a far-reaching situation in
which the Colorado River supply at Lake
Mead is only one problem spot climate
researchers at Scripps are also tracking
growing threats to the water that
Southern California gets from the Sierra
Nevada and to the West's ground water
reserves California is facing changes in
when the water are its water supplies
will be available and how much water
will be available the crisis will be
here within 20 years there's no way that
we can change the carbon balance of the
atmosphere in that period of time so it
has to be a program of adaptation first
of all second of all we already have a
resident population here that uses all
of the water of Colorado River basically
it's fully subscribed and we're
proposing to add more I heard somebody
say they were going to double a
population of state of California by
2050 I don't know what they're going to
drink but it's not going to be water the
water will be showing up more in winter
than in summer and along with that it's
a little bit less certain but we also
expect with warmer temperatures there'll
be more tendency for evaporation and so
they'll just be generally less water
available both in the Colorado River
Basin where we get a lot of our water
and in in California's water supplies
from the Sierra Nevada and the like
Tim's work on the Colorado River
recently has shown that severe impacts
in in particular as Tim would put it
essentially the drying out of Lake
Powell and lake mead the two largest
reservoirs on
the Colorado River maybe only 20 years
away and certainly not much more than 30
or 40 years away you know we're in a
situation now where we're right up
against the edge there are some things
that can be done that will give us some
time certainly recycling water would be
one thing building more dams
conservation there's a whole litany of
things this problem has been on the
table for 20 years or more and there's
no shortage of ideas as to what to do
about it they're just been no will to do
anything about it now there will be
western states have turned to scripts
and other research centers to understand
what to expect from global warming and
how best to respond researchers say that
if there is any bright side to the water
crisis it's in the technological
advances over the past 20 years that
have allowed scientists to better see
unfolding climate change-related threats
and give mitigation and adaptation
measures a head start the state hydro
hydrologist Maury ruse 20 years ago I
guess now recognize that something was
going on in California but it was work
here at Scripps largely ever since then
that has documented just how real those
changes are and how widespread they are
and has linked changes in streamflow
timing and snowmelt to changes in in
wind plants green up and the like and so
really the a lot of the evidence that
this is real for us in California and
across the West came out of research
that was done here at Scripps scripture
has become essentially the go to
institution for a lot of state agencies
in terms of climate change and it's our
role has very much become one of being
the institution that that Wade's through
the large number of projections that are
available of sea level rise of warming
trends of water resource impacts that
sort of thing
helping the state agencies to to sort
through those to focus on the ones that
are most likely or most pressing for
debt injure who routinely travels to the
Sierra Nevada to track hydrological
trends innovation has come in the form
of rugged miniaturized measurement
devices meanwhile Barnett a pioneer and
long-range climate forecasting marvels
at how powerful and accurate computer
models have become when I first looked
at them a couple decades ago they didn't
even have the wind blowing the right way
over the Pacific Ocean Oh didn't
obviously spend much time on them what
they've gotten better and better with
each iteration I'd say we're sort of in
the fourth or fifth generation of
climate models right now and there are a
lot of things that they really do well
are still not perfect by any means
precipitation is very hard for them to
do but and a few other variables but by
large they're our best shot for looking
at the future and they all seem to be
telling us pretty much the same story
this little instrument here is is one
that we can literally just put in the in
a river to measure the depth of the
river every half hour for a year and
then come back a year later to to get
all the data and twenty years ago the
instruments required to do this would
have roughly been about the size it
would have fit in a space about the size
of a picnic table or something like that
this little guy is even smaller and this
measures temperatures they'll measure
air temperatures or water temperatures
or whatever you put it inside of and
again you can you can put this out in a
stream or even hang it in a tree and
measure measurements every half hour for
up to three years before you have to go
and get it yeah those kind of
technological advances really are what
are going to make it possible for us to
keep up with and keep track of climate
change and it's impacts as they occur
without having to begin all over again
with a whole new set of monitoring
networks
this has been a presentation of Scripps
Institution of Oceanography at UC San
Diego
you